.. -*- mode: rst;mode: auto-fill -*-

Running FriendlyFruit
=====================

Currently FriendlyFruit is just a proof-of-concept.  There are various
problems around 3D models and RPC that I have been trying to solve,
and FriendlyFruit is the testbed.  However, it does run, and it could
be the foundation for a real Raspberry Pi multi-user game.

I've been using Panda3D on the basis that Panda is probably the
easiest game engine to learn.  Currently there is a demo scene that
you can walk around.  When you start the game, you will see a (very
well modelled) building from 3dWarehouse in front of you.

If you walk to the right hand side of the building, you will see a
crude humanoid figure walking up and down with a walk cycle that
doesn't quite work!  He was made in Blender by yours truly.  In spite
of the fact that he's not the world's greatest model, though, I'm very
pleased.  He has a raspberry badge UV-mapped onto his chest,
demonstrating that the textures work.  He also has a walk cycle of
sorts, demonstrating that armatures and animations work.  That's
really all we need.

If you log on to the game twice, the characters will be able to see
each other.  They both start in the same location, so if one of them
walks backwards, it will see the other.  If one walks forward, it will
be seen by the other.

Prerequisites
-------------

If you want to get FriendlyFruit working, you will need to install
Panda3D (the developer kit, not the runtime) from
http://www.panda3d.org/.  If you want to run your own server (and you
do, because there are no public servers at this time) you will need
the following additional dependencies:

* MongoDB (http://www.mongodb.org/) and PyMongo
  (http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Python+Language+Center).  I am
  using MongoDB 2.0.4 from
  http://www.mongodb.org/display/DOCS/Ubuntu+and+Debian+packages but
  you should be able to use the version from your distro without
  problems.

  One word of warning is that Mongo tends to waste disk space if you
  aren't storing a large amount of data.  When you create a new
  database, it assumes you will be storing a lot of data, and it
  creates some very large files for it!  For this reason, edit
  /etc/mongodb.conf and add the option

  smallfiles = true

  to the end.  This will cause the largest per-database file to be
  32M.  For the same reason, if you run multiple server instances, try
  to use the same database for all of them (unless they become very
  large).  That way you only take the big file hit once, rather than
  once for each instance.

  It's also worth adding the option

  journal = true

  so you don't lose your data in the event that your machine crashes.
  (This is the default with some configurations of Mongo, but
  specifying it explicitly doesn't hurt.)

* Google Protobuf (https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/).
  You should be able to install this from your distro.  You need the
  Python support and the compiler.

* Scons (http://www.scons.org/).  This is used for building the
  Protobuf RPC stubs.  Again you should be able to install it from
  your distro.

* Pyflakes (https://launchpad.net/pyflakes) is a lint tool for
  Python.  You don't need this unless you're making a lot of changes
  to the source files, and you want to check for silly bugs.

  There is a script called run-pyflakes which invokes this program on
  all the manually-written Python files.  It's probably sensible to
  run this before checking changes into git.

* PythonMagick and ImageMagick (http://www.imagemagick.org/) are used
  for converting MakeHuman's TIFF images to PNG.  You don't need this
  unless you are going to be creating your own MakeHuman models.

* Downloadable scenes are compressed using the xz format
  (http://tukaani.org/xz/).  You will need to download the supporting
  programs, xz and unxz, as well as the libraries.  On Ubuntu and
  Debian you can get this software by installing the xz-utils package.

Building
--------

Run scons in the top level directory, to build the RPC stubs.  These
are pure Python and presumably cross-platform; nothing is compiled to
machine code.

If you pull new revisions from the repository, don't forget to run
scons again.

Configuration
-------------

You should have a file called server.cfg.sample.  You probably don't
need to change this, in which case the simplest thing is to symlink it
to server.cfg.  If you do need to change it, make a copy instead, and
then edit the copy.

The network section allows you to change the addresses that the server
listens on.  You could for example make it listen only on the loopback
address, for extra security during testing.

The database section gives the details of your database server.  The
host and port should normally be left unchanged; you only need them if
you want to run the server on a different machine to Mongo.

The prefix allows you to run more than one instance of FriendlyFruit
with a single database.  The default ('main.fruit') tells the server
to use the database 'main' and to prefix all collection names with
'fruit'.  To run two instances against the same database, you could
give them prefixes like 'main.raspberry' and 'main.strawberry'.  If
they got big enough that you wanted to use different databases, you
could use 'raspberry.fruit' and 'strawberry.fruit'.

MakeHuman Models
----------------

When you export your model from MakeHuman, you will have an mhx
file, which will later be used for importing it into Blender.
Suppose your model is called Boris; you might then call your file
boris.mhx.  You will also have a directory which holds the textures.
Unhelpfully this will always be called 'textures'.  If you are in
the media directory, you can convert the model as follows:

| mv boris.mhx boris_input.mhx
| ../scripts/process-mhx boris_input.mhx boris

You will now end up with a directory called boris, containing PNG
versions of all the textures.  You will also have a new file called
boris.mhx, which has been fixed up so it will look for the textures in
the right place (the boris directory, rather than the textures
directory).  You can now import this into Blender.

If you create new MakeHuman models and want them added to the
repository, please run scripts/process-mhx on them *before* checking
them into your branch.  This will ensure that the repository only
stores the PNG images, rather than storing the TIFF and PNG images
separately.  Storing two copies of the images bloats the repository,
and it is likely to get big enough as it is.

Running FriendlyFruit
---------------------

Start by running the server.  It takes no arguments because all its
configuration information comes from server.cfg.

Once the server is running, you need to create a user account.  Run
the client like this:

./client --register -u myname -p mypass localhost

You should see a response from the server indicating that your account
was created.

To play, you do much the same thing:

./client -u myname -p mypass localhost

(I know the handling of the password isn't very secure or convenient,
but it's not the most important thing at the moment.)

Once the client is running, you control the camera with the WASD keys,
plus the left and right arrow keys.

I've tested this with Ubuntu 11.10.  If that's what you're running,
and you have a 3D-capable video card, you stand a good chance of
success.  Theoretically Panda supports quite a lot of platforms,
though, so you should stand a reasonable chance on other systems too.

Finally, be aware that this code is at a very early stage.  Don't
expect anything polished, instead expect to mess around quite a bit in
order to get it working.

Please let me know how you get on.

3D Object Notes
===============

3Dwarehouse
-----------

Not all files in 3Dwarehouse are downloadable.  This is annoying
because non-downloadable models clutter up the site and make it
difficult to find what you want.  One tip is that the Advanced Search
screen has an option to ignore models which cannot be downloaded.

Once you have a downloadable model, you have to decide whether you
will be editing it further with Sketchup.  If you won't, download it
in COLLADA format and go to `COLLADA to Panda`_, below.  If you will
be editing it, download it in Sketchup format.  When you have finished
editing, go to `Sketchup to COLLADA`_.

Sketchup to COLLADA
-------------------

If you have a model in Sketchup, and you want to use it in a game, you
should export it as COLLADA.  The export options should be set as
follows::


    [X] Export Two-Sided Faces
    [ ] Export Edges
    [X] Triangulate All Faces
    [ ] Export Only Selection Set
    [ ] Export Hidden Geometry
    [ ] Preserve Component Hierarchies

    [X] Export Texture Maps
    [ ] Use "Color By Layer" Materials

    [X] Preserve Credits


This will give you a usable COLLADA file.  Continue to `COLLADA to
Panda`_ to get it into Panda.

COLLADA to Panda
----------------

Run dae2egg on your file.  This will give you a text file which can be
loaded into Panda.  You can optionally run egg2bam on the egg file, to
compress it and speed up loading.

You may find that the paths to your texture files don't end up
pointing to the place where you want to keep them.  If this happens,
it's often easiest to fix it by editing the egg file (with a text
editor or a script).  It's a simple text format so it's easy to make
this kind of change.

COLLADA to Blender
------------------

If you have a Sketchup model, I would suggest that you edit it in
Sketchup if you can.  Converting it to another format is unlikely to
preserve all the information in the file.  However, you may be forced
to convert, perhaps because you don't run Windows or because you want
to combine it with something that is already in Blender.

Blender ships with a COLLADA importer, but there is a bug which
results in the wrong textures being assigned to some of the faces of
the model.  You could reapply the textures, but this would be rather
tedious for a complex model.

A better option is the Open Asset Import Library,
http://assimp.sourceforge.net .  At the time of writing, you need to
download a pre-release version, like this:

svn co https://assimp.svn.sourceforge.net/svnroot/assimp/trunk assimp

I ended up with revision 1231.  If you try this and it doesn't work,
try checking out this exact revision.

You then build Assimp yourself, following the instructions on the
website.  Once you have built it, convert the COLLADA file to
Wavefront:

assimp export model.dae model.obj

This can be imported into Blender using the Wavefront importer.

(There are other programs which convert COLLADA to Wavefront, but as
usual, many of them give unsatisfactory results.  In particular, many
of them fail to export the textures properly.)
